docno="lists-003-2114716"
received="Fri May 14 14:29:45 1993 EST"
sent="Fri, 14 May 1993 17:29:24 -0400"
name="Steve Summit"
email="scs@adam.mit.edu"
subject="Re: CHARSET considerations"
id="9305142129.AA22544@adam.MIT.EDU"
inreplyto="9305121752.AA00650@dimacs.rutgers.edu"

To: TROTH@ricevm1.rice.edu, pine-info@cac.washington.edu
Cc: ietf-822@dimacs.rutgers.edu, ietf-charsets@INNOSOFT.COM,

In <9305121752.AA00650@dimacs.rutgers.edu>, Rick wrote:
Any user of Pine 3.05 (and as far as I can tell 3.07 or 2.x) can shoot themself in the foot  (head if you prefer)  by setting character-set = Zeldas_private_codepage. 

This is almost certainly a bad idea, especially if (as Rick implied in another part of the referenced message) the user can do so by setting a default charset value in a user configuration file somewhere.  (If users dink with the message headers themselves, all bets are off.) 

Should the Pine developers remove this feature? 

I'm not sure what the feature in question is, but if it's something which lets users specify the value to be sent out as the MIME Content-Type: charset, I think it's a bad idea, and should be removed or significantly altered. 

An easy mistake to make (I speak from experience) is to assume that the charset parameter on a MIME Content-Type: line encodes the character set used by the entity composing the message, or the character set to be used by the entity displaying the message. I find that the best way to think about charset is that it is *neither*.  charset is an octet-based encoding used during message transfer; it need bear no relation to the composing or viewing character sets.  In the most general case, a message will be composed using some native character set, translated automatically to a MIME-registered charset, and translated at the other end into a native display character set.  It should be more likely that the charset value be selected by an automaton, not by a human. 

(If anyone finds the above paragraph startling, you're welcome to write to me for clarification.  I'm not going to prolong this message with additional explanations right now.) 

It's not necessarily *wrong* to think of charset as having something to do with the composing or viewing character set (in many cases, not coincidentally, all three will be identical), but it is very easy to make conceptual mistakes, implement nonconformant software, or just generally misunderstand how MIME is supposed to work if you don't explicitly separate in your mind the concepts of composing/viewing character sets and transmission charsets.  (You'll notice that I reinforce this distinction in my own head and in this message by using the terms "character set" and "charset" noninterchangeably.) 

The charset situation is much like the canonical CRLF situation: the fact that the canonical representation is identical to some but not all of the available local representations guarantees misunderstandings. 

To be sure, automated selection of and translation to a registered MIME charset is a non-trivial task, and mailers which are trying to adopt MIME right away cannot be faulted for deferring development of such functionality for a while.  However, just letting users specify non-default, non-7-bit-US-ASCII, (non-MIME) charsets is an open invitation to misunderstanding and noninteroperability. 

For now, composition agents which wish to allow users to use extended character sets (such as Latin-1), but which elect to relegate character set and/or charset selection to the user, should either present the user with a menu of registered MIME charsets from which to select (presumably it will be up to the user to ensure that the editor or composition tool is actually using a character set corresponding to the selected charset), or (in the case of what it sounds like PINE is doing) at least filter the user's open-ended charset selection against the list of registered values (and perhaps also the X- pattern). 

I've copied this message to the IETF character sets mailing list (ietf-charsets@innosoft.com, subscription requests to ietf-charsets-request@innosoft.com); any followup traffic should be sent there, and *not* to the ietf-822 list. 

Steve Summit scs@adam.mit.edu 

P.S. to pine-info@cac.washington.edu: despite my e-mail address, I'm actually in Seattle, near UW.  I'd be glad to stop by one day and talk with you guys in person about this stuff. 