docno="lists-046-11489622"
name="Dave Raggett"
email="dsr@w3.org"
sent="Fri, 22 Mar 1996 18:19:06 -0500"
subject="Minutes for 18th March"
To: w3c-math-erb@w3.org

Meeting Notes of Math-ERB Teleconference: Thursday 18th March '96 

Present: 

Bruce Smith, Wolfram Neil Soiffer, Wolfram T.V. Raman, Adobe Dave Raggett, W3C 

Meeting time/frequency 

Dave has been unable to find any time that all of us can make. The new time will be every Monday at 1300 EST until further notice. Dave will attempt to keep Nico in the loop via email on the mailing list and separate phone calls. 

Adding further People to the Math-ERB 

Stu Weibel of OCLC sends his regrets that they are too busy to accept the invitation at this time. Elsevier have contacted the AMS. Ralph Youngen, Associate Director, Electronic Product Development for AMS has accepted the invitation to join the group, along with a couple of his colleagues. 

The need for full SGML? 

We discussed whether it was necessary to use SGML for the math notation. Basically, we have a preference for an extensible operator precedence notation. This can be included in HTML documents and handled correctly by SGML processing applications via the NOTATION mechanism. 

When using operator precedence, there is a need to constrain the context in which given operators can be used. Niel said this wasn't as simple as at first it might appear. Dave will work on a formal mechanism for this. 

It is also unclear as to when macro processing is applied. Further discussion on this is needed. It should be practical for parsers to deal with missing arguments sensibly. This in general depends on the context. 

Raman voiced a concern on Bruce's comment on 2D pictures. We agreed however, that a fixed set of "layout" idioms are sufficient for HTML-math. Raman promised to propose some new wording. He also gave us a URL for his test suite, which I have added to the math-erb home page. 

We ended by discussing some of the parsing issues for mismatched brackets and number literals. It seems clear that bracket matching can't in general be required. Authors should be able to control the settings for this and for literals. 

Dave has posted a dump of his understanding as a result of this conference call. See: current thoughts. 

Dave Raggett, 22nd March. 

-- Dave Raggett <dsr@w3.org> tel: +1 (617) 258 5741 fax: +1 (617) 258 5999 World Wide Web Consortium, 545 Technology Square, Cambridge, MA 02139 url = http://www.w3.org/People/Raggett 