Date: Fri, 6 Jul 2001 00:41:00 -0700 (PDT)
From: steven.kean@enron.com
To: george.wasaff@enron.com
Subject: Can you help me?
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
X-From: Steven J Kean X-To: George Wasaff X-cc: X-bcc: X-Folder: \Steven_Kean_Nov2001_1\Notes Folders\All documents X-Origin: KEAN-S X-FileName: skean.nsf 

---------------------- Forwarded by Steven J Kean/NA/Enron on 07/06/2001
07:40 AM ---------------------------

steve.knight@businesslayers.com on 06/25/2001 12:57:25 PM 
To: Steven J Kean/NA/Enron@Enron
cc:

Subject: Can you help me?

I am looking for some help in identifying the right person(s) at: Enron Corp., for an introduction of our software solution.  Steven, if you could take a moment and point me to the appropriate contact I would greatly appreciate it. 

Summary of eProvisioning: 

eProvisioning radically improves people's Time-To-Productivity by transforming the disparate activities that allocate IT resources to people into a secure and automatic process. Once provisioned, these resources remain digitally connected to each person as they move through the business cycle and are dynamically updated as necessary. At the appropriate time, they are systematically, securely and automatically removed. 

Organizations that employ eProvisioning gain a competitive edge and access complete security by ensuring that people are kept productive from day one, and are prevented from becoming counterproductive beyond the day they leave. In addition, by aligning their IT infrastructure with business priorities, organizations can effectively manage change across the extended enterprise, and better respond to emerging market requirements. 

eProvision Day One provides business and IT executives with the ability to quickly identify bottlenecks and maintain accountability of the eProvisioning process through comprehensive reporting and tracking capabilities. As business relationships between organizations expand, Business Layers technology provides the framework for integration and interoperability between eProvisioning partners - suppliers and service providers, devices and applications - which are the digital foundations of the Internet economy. 

Please, if you could give me a few minutes of your valuable time or guide me to the right person to describe the significant benefits of what we offer." 

Web Site:  http://www.businesslayers.com 

Demo-Site: http://demo.businesslayers.com User: blayers Pass: blayers 

Thank you for your time. 

Steve Knight SC Regional Sales Manager Business Layers, Inc. 
817-490-0170