Baseball is a bat-and-ball game played between two teams of nine players each who take turns batting and fielding.

The offense attempts to score runs by hitting a ball thrown by the pitcher with a bat and moving counter-clockwise around a series of four bases: first, second, third, and home plate.
A run is scored when a player advances around the bases and returns to home plate.

Players on the batting team take turns hitting against the pitcher of the fielding team, which tries to prevent runs by getting hitters out in any of several ways.
A player on the batting team who reaches a base safely can later attempt to advance to subsequent bases during teammates' turns batting, such as on a hit or by other means.
The teams switch between batting and fielding whenever the fielding team records three outs.
One turn batting for both teams, beginning with the visiting team, constitutes an inning.
A game comprises nine innings, and the team with the greater number of runs at the end of the game wins.

Evolving from older bat-and-ball games, an early form of baseball was being played in England by the mid-18th century.
This game was brought by immigrants to North America, where the modern version developed.
By the late 19th century, baseball was widely recognized as the national sport of the United States.
Baseball is now popular in North America and parts of Central and South America and the Caribbean, East Asia, and Europe.

In the United States and Canada, professional Major League Baseball (MLB) teams are divided into the National League (NL) and American League (AL), each with three divisions: East, West, and Central.
The major league champion is determined by playoffs that culminate in the World Series.
The top level of play is similarly split in Japan between the Central League and Pacific Leagues and in Cuba between the West League and East League.

==History==

===Origins of baseball===

The evolution of baseball from older bat-and-ball games is difficult to trace with precision.
A French manuscript from 1344 contains an illustration of clerics playing a game, possibly la soule, with similarities to baseball.
Other old French games such as thèque, la balle au bâton, and la balle empoisonnée also appear to be related.
Consensus once held that today's baseball is a North American development from the older game rounders, popular in Great Britain and Ireland.
Baseball Before We Knew It: A Search for the Roots of the Game (2005), by David Block, suggests that the game originated in England; recently uncovered historical evidence supports this position.
Block argues that rounders and early baseball were actually regional variants of each other, and that the game's most direct antecedents are the English games of stoolball and "tut-ball".
It has long been believed that cricket also descended from such games, though evidence uncovered in early 2009 suggests that cricket may have been imported to England from Flanders.

The earliest known reference to baseball is in a 1744 British publication, A Little Pretty Pocket-Book, by John Newbery.
It contains a rhymed description of "base-ball" and a woodcut that shows a field set-up somewhat similar to the modern game—though in a triangular rather than diamond configuration, and with posts instead of ground-level bases.
David Block discovered that the first recorded game of "Bass-Ball" took place in 1749 in Surrey, and featured the Prince of Wales as a player.
William Bray, an English lawyer, recorded a game of baseball on Easter Monday 1755 in Guildford, Surrey.
This early form of the game was apparently brought to North America by English immigrants.
Rounders was also brought to the continent by both British and Irish immigrants.
The first known American reference to baseball appears in a 1791 Pittsfield, Massachusetts, town bylaw prohibiting the playing of the game near the town's new meeting house.
By 1796, a version of the game was well-known enough to earn a mention in a German scholar's book on popular pastimes.
As described by Johann Gutsmuths, "englische Base-ball" involved a contest between two teams, in which "the batter has three attempts to hit the ball while at the home plate."
Only one out was required to retire a side.

By the early 1830s, there were reports of a variety of uncodified bat-and-ball games recognizable as early forms of baseball being played around North America.
These games were often referred to locally as "town ball", though other names such as "round-ball" and "base-ball" were also used.
Among the earliest examples to receive a detailed description—albeit five decades after the fact, in a letter from an attendee to Sporting Life magazine—took place in Beachville, Ontario, in 1838.
There were many similarities to modern baseball, and some crucial differences: five bases (or byes); first bye just  from the home bye; batter out if a hit ball was caught after the first bounce.
The once widely accepted story that Abner Doubleday invented baseball in Cooperstown, New York, in 1839 has been conclusively debunked by sports historians.

In 1845, Alexander Cartwright, a member of New York City's Knickerbocker Club, led the codification of the so-called Knickerbocker Rules.
The practice, common to bat-and-ball games of the day, of "soaking" or "plugging"—effecting a putout by hitting a runner with a thrown ball—was barred.
The rules thus facilitated the use of a smaller, harder ball than had been common.
Several other rules also brought the Knickerbockers' game close to the modern one, though a ball caught on the first bounce was, again, an out and only underhand pitching was allowed.
While there are reports that the New York Knickerbockers played games in 1845, the contest now recognized as the first officially recorded baseball game in U.S. history took place on June 19, 1846, in Hoboken, New Jersey: the "New York Nine" defeated the Knickerbockers, 23–1, in four innings.
With the Knickerbocker code as the basis, the rules of modern baseball continued to evolve over the next half-century.

===History of baseball in the United States===

====The game turns professional====
In the mid-1850s, a baseball craze hit the New York metropolitan area.
By 1856, local journals were referring to baseball as the "national pastime" or "national game".
A year later, sixteen area clubs formed the sport's first governing body, the National Association of Base Ball Players.
In 1858 in  Corona, Queens New York, at the Fashion Race Course, the first games of baseball to charge admission took place.
The games, which took place between the all stars of Brooklyn, including players from the Brooklyn Atlantics, Excelsior of Brooklyn, Putnams and Eckford of Brooklyn, and the All Stars of New York (Manhattan), including players from the New York Knickerbockers, Gothams (predecessors of the San Francisco Giants), Eagles and Empire, are commonly believed to be the first all-star baseball games.
In 1863, the organization disallowed putouts made by catching a fair ball on the first bounce.
Four years later, it barred participation by African Americans.
The game's commercial potential was developing: in 1869 the first fully professional baseball club, the Cincinnati Red Stockings, was formed and went undefeated against a schedule of semipro and amateur teams.
The first professional league, the National Association of Professional Base Ball Players, lasted from 1871 to 1875; scholars dispute its status as a major league.

The more formally structured National League was founded in 1876.
As the oldest surviving major league, the National League is sometimes referred to as the "senior circuit".
Several other major leagues formed and failed.
In 1884, African American Moses Walker (and, briefly, his brother Welday) played in one of these, the American Association.
An injury ended Walker's major league career, and by the early 1890s, a gentlemen's agreement in the form of the baseball color line effectively barred black players from the white-owned professional leagues, major and minor.
Professional Negro leagues formed, but quickly folded.
Several independent African American teams succeeded as barnstormers.
Also in 1884, overhand pitching was legalized.
In 1887, softball, under the name of indoor baseball or indoor-outdoor, was invented as a winter version of the parent game.
Virtually all of the modern baseball rules were in place by 1893; the last major change—counting foul balls as strikes—was instituted in 1901.
The National League's first successful counterpart, the American League, which evolved from the minor Western League, was established that year.
The two leagues, each with eight teams, were rivals that fought for the best players, often disregarding each other's contracts and engaging in bitter legal disputes.

A modicum of peace was eventually established, leading to the National Agreement of 1903.
The pact formalized relations both between the two major leagues and between them and the National Association of Professional Base Ball Leagues, representing most of the country's minor professional leagues.
The World Series, pitting the two major league champions against each other, was inaugurated that fall, albeit without express major league sanction: The Boston Americans of the American League defeated the Pittsburgh Pirates of the National League.
The next year, the series was not held, as the National League champion New York Giants, under manager John McGraw, refused to recognize the major league status of the American League and its champion.
In 1905, the Giants were National League champions again and team management relented, leading to the establishment of the World Series as the major leagues' annual championship event.

As professional baseball became increasingly profitable, players frequently raised grievances against owners over issues of control and equitable income distribution.
During the major leagues' early decades, players on various teams occasionally attempted strikes, which routinely failed when their jobs were sufficiently threatened.
In general, the strict rules of baseball contracts and the reserve clause, which bound players to their teams even when their contracts had ended, tended to keep the players in check.
Motivated by dislike for particularly stingy owner Charles Comiskey and gamblers' payoffs, real and promised, members of the Chicago White Sox conspired to throw the 1919 World Series.
The Black Sox Scandal led to the formation of a new National Commission of baseball that drew the two major leagues closer together.
The first major league baseball commissioner, Kenesaw Mountain Landis, was elected in 1920.
That year also saw the founding of the Negro National League; the first significant Negro league, it would operate until 1931.
For part of the 1920s, it was joined by the Eastern Colored League.

====Rise of Ruth and racial integration====

Compared with the present, professional baseball in the early 20th century was lower scoring and pitchers, the likes of Walter Johnson and Christy Mathewson, were more dominant.
The "inside game", which demanded that players "scratch for runs", was played much more aggressively than it is today: the brilliant and often violent Ty Cobb epitomized this style.
The so-called dead-ball era ended in the early 1920s with several changes in rule and circumstance that were advantageous to hitters.
Strict new regulations governing the ball's size, shape and composition along with a new rule officially banning the spitball, along with other pitches that depended on the ball being treated or roughed-up with foreign substances after the death of Ray Chapman who was hit by a pitch in August 1920, coupled with superior materials available after World War I, resulted in a ball that traveled farther when hit.
The construction of additional seating to accommodate the rising popularity of the game often had the effect of bringing the outfield fences closer in, making home runs more common.
The rise of the legendary player Babe Ruth, the first great power hitter of the new era, helped permanently alter the nature of the game.
The club with which Ruth set most of his slugging records, the New York Yankees, built a reputation as the majors' premier team.
In the late 1920s and early 1930s, St. Louis Cardinals general manager Branch Rickey invested in several minor league clubs and developed the first modern "farm system".
A new Negro National League was organized in 1933; four years later, it was joined by the Negro American League.
The first elections to the Baseball Hall of Fame took place in 1936.
In 1939 Little League Baseball was founded in Pennsylvania.
By the late 1940s, it was the organizing body for children's baseball leagues across the United States.

With America's entry into World War II, many professional players had left to serve in the armed forces.
A large number of minor league teams disbanded as a result and the major league game seemed under threat as well.
Chicago Cubs owner Philip K. Wrigley led the formation of a new professional league with women players to help keep the game in the public eye – the All-American Girls Professional Baseball League existed from 1943 to 1954.
The inaugural College World Series was held in 1947, and the Babe Ruth League youth program was founded.
This program soon became another important organizing body for children's baseball.
The first crack in the unwritten agreement barring blacks from white-controlled professional ball occurred the previous year: Jackie Robinson was signed by the National League's Brooklyn Dodgers—where Branch Rickey had become general manager—and began playing for their minor league team in Montreal.
In 1947, Robinson broke the major leagues' color barrier when he debuted with the Dodgers.
Larry Doby debuted with the American League's Cleveland Indians the same year.
Latin American players, largely overlooked before, also started entering the majors in greater numbers.
In 1951, two Chicago White Sox, Venezuelan-born Chico Carrasquel and black Cuban-born Minnie Miñoso, became the first Hispanic All-Stars.

