Gaelic football (Irish: Peil Ghaelach; short name Peil or Caid), commonly referred to as football or Gaelic, is an Irish team sport.
It is a form of football derived from traditional Irish ball games.
It is played between two teams of 15 players on a rectangular grass pitch.
The objective of the sport is to score points by passing the ball through the other team's goals (3 points) or a set of two upright posts separated by a crossbar  above the ground (1 point).

Players advance the football, a spherical leather ball, up the field with a combination of carrying, bouncing, kicking, hand-passing, and soloing (dropping the ball and then toe-kicking the ball upward into the hands).
In the game, two types of scores are possible: points and goals.
A point is awarded for kicking or hand-passing the ball over the crossbar, signalled by the umpire raising a white flag.
A goal is awarded for kicking the ball under the crossbar into the net, signalled by the umpire raising a green flag.
Positions in Gaelic football are similar to that in other football codes, and comprise one goalkeeper, six backs, two midfielders, and six forwards, with a variable number of substitutes.

Gaelic football is one of four sports (collectively referred to as the "Gaelic games") controlled by the Gaelic Athletic Association (GAA), the largest sporting organisation in Ireland.
Along with hurling and camogie, Gaelic football is one of the few remaining strictly amateur sports in the world, with players, coaches, and managers prohibited from receiving any form of payment.
Gaelic football is mainly played on the island of Ireland, although units of the Association exist in other areas such as Great Britain and North America.

Gaelic football is the most popular sport in Ireland in terms of attendance, with the 2011 All-Ireland Senior Championship Final, held at Croke Park, Dublin, drawing an attendance of 82,300 people.
Outside of Ireland, football is mainly played amongst members of the Irish diaspora.
Gaelic Park in New York City is the largest purpose-built Gaelic sports venue outside of Ireland.
Three major football competitions operate throughout the year: the National Football League and the All-Ireland Senior Championship are operated on a county basis, while the All-Ireland Club Championship is contested by individual clubs.
The All-Ireland Senior Championship is run as a knock-out competition, with the top two counties meeting in the All-Ireland Football Final, considered the most prestigious event in Gaelic football.

Under the auspices of the GAA, Gaelic football is a male-only sport; however, the related sport of ladies' Gaelic football is governed by the Ladies' Gaelic Football Association.
Similarities between Gaelic football and Australian rules football have allowed the development of international rules football, a hybrid sport, and a series of Test matches has been held regularly since 1998.

==History==
Gaelic football was first codified in 1887, although it has links to older varieties of football played in Ireland and known collectively as caid.
Consequently, the name caid is used by some people to refer to present day Gaelic football.

The first legal reference of football in Ireland was in 1308, when John McCrocan, a spectator at a football game at Novum Castrum de Leuan (the New Castle of the Lyons or Newcastle) was charged with accidentally stabbing a player named William Bernard.
A field near Newscastle, Co.
Dublin is still known as the football field.

The Statute of Galway of 1527 allowed the playing of "foot balle" and archery but banned "'hokie' — the hurling of a little ball with sticks or staves" as well as other sports.

By the 17th century, the situation had changed considerably.
The games had grown in popularity and were widely played.
This was due to the patronage of the gentry.
Now instead of opposing the games it was the gentry and the ruling class who were serving as patrons of the games.
Games were organised between landlords with each team comprising 20 or more tenants.
Wagers were commonplace with purses of up to 100 guineas (Prior, 1997).

The earliest record of a recognised precursor to the modern game date from a match in County Meath in 1670, in which catching and kicking the ball was permitted.

However even "foot-ball" was banned by the severe Sunday Observance Act of 1695, which imposed a fine of one shilling (a substantial amount at the time) for those caught playing sports.
It proved difficult, if not impossible, for the authorities to enforce the Act and the earliest recorded inter-county match in Ireland was one between Louth and Meath, at Slane, in 1712, about which the poet James Dall McCuairt wrote a poem of 88 verses beginning "Ba haigeanta".

A six-a-side version was played in Dublin in the early 18th century, and 100 years later there were accounts of games played between County sides (Prior, 1997).

By the early 19th century, various football games, referred to collectively as caid, were popular in Kerry, especially the Dingle Peninsula.
Father W. Ferris described two forms of caid: the "field game" in which the object was to put the ball through arch-like goals, formed from the boughs of two trees, and; the epic "cross-country game" which lasted the whole of a Sunday (after mass) and was won by taking the ball across a parish boundary.
"Wrestling", "holding" opposing players, and carrying the ball were all allowed.

During the 1860s and 1870s, Rugby football started to become popular in Ireland.
Trinity College, Dublin was an early stronghold of Rugby, and the rules of the (English) Football Association were codified in 1863 and distributed widely.
By this time, according to Gaelic football historian Jack Mahon, even in the Irish countryside, caid had begun to give way to a "rough-and-tumble game" which even allowed tripping.
Association football started to take hold, especially in Ulster, in the 1880s.

Limerick was the stronghold of the native game around this time, and the Commercials Club, founded by employees of Cannock's Drapery Store, was one of the first to impose a set of rules which was adapted by other clubs in the city.
Of all the Irish pastimes the GAA set out to preserve and promote, it is fair to say that Gaelic football was in the worst shape at the time of the association's foundation (GAA Museum, 2001).

Irish forms of football were not formally arranged into an organised playing code by the Gaelic Athletic Association (GAA) until 1887.
The GAA sought to promote traditional Irish sports, such as hurling and to reject "foreign" (particularly English) imports.
The first Gaelic football rules, showing the influence of hurling and a desire to differentiate from association football – for example in their lack of an offside rule — were drawn up by Maurice Davin and published in the United Ireland magazine on 7 February 1887.
The rules of the aforementioned Commercials Club became the basis for these official (Gaelic Football) rules who, unsurprisingly, won the inaugural All-Ireland Senior Football Final (representing County Limerick)

On Bloody Sunday in 1920, during the Anglo-Irish War, a football match at Croke Park was attacked by British forces.
14 people were killed and 65 were injured.
Among the dead was Tipperary footballer Michael Hogan, for whom the Hogan Stand at Croke Park (completed in 1924) was named.

Ladies' Gaelic football has become increasingly popular with women since the 1970s.

The relationship between Gaelic football and Australian rules football and the question of whether they have shared origins is a matter of historical controversy.
Games are held between an Irish representative team and an Australian team, under compromise rules known as international rules football.

==Rules==

===Playing field===

A Gaelic pitch is similar in some respects to a rugby pitch but larger.
The grass pitch is rectangular, stretching  long and  wide.
There are H-shaped goalposts at each end, formed by two posts, which are usually  high, set  apart, and connected  above the ground by a crossbar.
A net extending behind the goal is attached to the crossbar and lower goal posts.
The same pitch is used for hurling; the GAA, which organises both sports, decided this to facilitate dual usage.
Lines are marked at distances of 13 metres, 20 metres and 45 metres (65m in Hurling) from each end-line.
Shorter pitches and smaller goals are used by youth teams.

===Duration===

The majority of adult football and all minor and under-21 matches last for 60 minutes, divided into two halves of 30 minutes, with the exception of senior inter-county games which last for 70 minutes (two halves of 35 minutes).
Draws are decided by replays or by playing 20 minutes of extra time (two halves of 10 minutes).
Juniors have a half of 20 minutes or 25 minutes in some cases.
Half-time lasts for about 5 or 10 minutes.

===Teams===
Teams consist of fifteen players (a goalkeeper, two corner backs, a full back, two wing backs, a centre back, two mid fielders, two wing forwards, a centre forward, two corner forwards and a full forward) plus up to fifteen substitutes, of which five may be used.
Each player is numbered 1–15, starting with the goalkeeper, who must wear a jersey colour different from that of his or her teammates.
Up to fifteen substitutes may be named on the team sheet, number 16 usually being the reserve goalkeeper.

===Positions===

===Ball===

The game is played with a round leather football made of 18 stitched leather panels, similar in appearance to a traditional volleyball (but larger), with a circumference of , weighing between  when dry.
It may be kicked or hand passed.
A hand pass is not a punch but rather a strike of the ball with the side of the closed fist, using the knuckle of the thumb.

===Types of Fouls===
There are three main types of fouls in Gaelic Football which can result in the ball being given to the other team, a player being cautioned, a player being removed from the field, or even the game being terminated.

====Technical fouls====
The following are considered technical fouls ("fouling the ball"):
* Bouncing the ball twice in a row (It may be soloed continuously)
* Changing hands: Throwing the ball from your right-hand to left or vice-versa (legal in the ladies' game)
* Going four steps without releasing, bouncing or soloing the ball (soloing involves kicking the ball into one's own hands)
* Hand passing a goal.
To hand pass a ball with an open palm there must be a clear striking action (the ball may be punched over the bar from up in the air, but not into the goal).
* Picking the ball directly off the ground (it must be scooped up into the hands by the foot).
However in ladies' Gaelic football the ball may be picked up directly.
* Square ball is an often controversial rule: If, at the moment the ball enters the small square, there is already an attacking player inside the small rectangle, then a free out is awarded.
As of 2012 square balls are only counted if the player is inside the square when the ball is kicked from a free or set piece.
An opposing player is allowed in the square during open play.
* Throwing the ball (it may be "hand-passed" by striking with the fist).

====Aggressive Fouls====
Aggressive fouls are physical or verbal fouls committed by a player against an opponent or the referee.
The player can be cautioned (shown a yellow card), ordered off the pitch without a substitute (red card), or (beginning 1 January 2014) ordered off the pitch with a substitution (Black Card).

====Dissent Fouls====
A dissent foul is a foul where a player fails to comply with the officials' judgment and/or instructions.
The player can be cautioned (shown a yellow card), ordered off the pitch without a substitute (red card), the free kick placement moved 13m further down-field, or in certain circumstances, the game can be terminated.
The following are considered dissent fouls:
* To challenge the authority of a Referee, Umpire, Linesman or Sideline Official
* To fail to comply with a Referee’s instruction to use a mouth guard.
* To refuse to leave the field of play, on the instruction of the Referee, for attention, after an injury involving bleeding.
* To show dissent with the Referee’s decision to award a free kick to the opposing team.
* To refuse to leave the field of play when ordered off (Red Card) or rejoin the game after being ordered off.
* A team or player(s) leaving the field without the Referee’s permission or refusing to continue playing

===Scoring===

If the ball goes over the crossbar, a point is scored and a white flag is raised by an umpire.
A point is scored by either kicking the ball over the crossbar, or fisting it over, in which case the hand must be closed whilst striking the ball.
If the ball goes below the crossbar, a goal, worth three points, is scored, and a green flag is raised by an umpire.
A goal is scored by kicking the ball into the net, not by fist passing the ball into it.
However, a player can strike the ball into the net with a closed fist if the ball was played to him by another player or came in contact with the post/crossbar/ground prior to connection.
The goal is guarded by a goalkeeper.
Scores are recorded in the format Goal Total-Point Total.
To determine the score-line goals must be converted to points and added to the other points.
For example, in a match with a final score of Team A 0–21 Team B 4–8, Team A is the winner with 21 points, as Team B scored only 20 points (4 times 3, plus 8).

