The narwhal, or narwhale (Monodon monoceros), is a medium-sized toothed whale and possesses a large "tusk" from a protruding canine tooth.
It lives year-round in the Arctic waters around Greenland, Canada, and Russia.
It is one of two living species of whale in the Monodontidae family, along with the beluga whale.
The narwhal males are distinguished by a long, straight, helical tusk, which is an elongated upper left canine.
The narwhal was one of many species described by Carolus Linnaeus in his publication Systema Naturae in 1758.

Like the beluga, narwhals are medium-sized whales.
For both genders, excluding the male's tusk, the total body size can range from ; the males are slightly larger than the females.
The average weight of an adult narwhal is .
At around 11 to 13 years old, the males become sexually mature; females become sexually mature at about 5 to 8 years old.
Narwhals do not have a dorsal fin, and their neck vertebrae are jointed like those of other mammals, not fused as in dolphins and most whales.

Found primarily in Canadian Arctic and Greenlandic and Russian waters, the narwhal is a uniquely specialized Arctic predator.
In winter, it feeds on benthic prey, mostly flatfish, under dense pack ice.
During the summer, narwhals mostly eat Arctic cod and Greenland halibut, with other fish such as polar cod making up the remainder of their diet.
Each year, they migrate from bays into the ocean as summer comes.
In the winter, the male narwhals occasionally dive up to  in depth, with dives lasting up to 25 minutes.
Narwhals, like most toothed whales, communicate with "clicks", "whistles", and "knocks".

Narwhals can live up to 50 years old.
They are often killed by suffocation when the sea ice freezes over.
Another cause of fatality, specifically among young whales, is starvation.
The current population of the narwhal is about 75,000, so narwhals qualify for Near Threatened under the criterion of the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).
Narwhals have been harvested for over a thousand years by Inuit people in northern Canada and Greenland for meat and ivory, and a regulated subsistence hunt continues.

==Taxonomy and etymology==

The narwhal was one of the many species originally described by Linnaeus in his Systema Naturae.
Its name is derived from the Old Norse word nár, meaning "corpse", in reference to the animal's greyish, mottled pigmentation, like that of a drowned sailor and its summer-time habit of lying still at or near the surface of the sea (called "logging").
<ref name="Fisheries and Oceans
Canada" />  The scientific name, Monodon monoceros, is derived from the Greek: "one-tooth one-horn".

The narwhal is most closely related to the beluga whale.
Together, these two species comprise the only extant members of the family Monodontidae, sometimes referred to as the "white whales".
The Monodontidae are distinguished by medium size (at around  in length), forehead melons (round sensory organs), short snouts, and the absence of a true dorsal fin.
The white whales, dolphins (Delphinidae) and porpoises (Phocoenidae) together comprise the superfamily Delphinoidea, which are of likely monophyletic origin.
Genetic evidence suggests the porpoises are more closely related to the white whales, and that these two families constitute a separate clade which diverged from the rest of Delphinoidea within the past 11 million years.
Fossil evidence shows that ancient white whales lived in tropical waters.
They may have migrated to Arctic and sub-Arctic waters in response to changes in the marine food chain during the Pliocene.

==Description==

Narwhals are medium-sized whales, and are around the same size as beluga whales.
Total length in both sexes, excluding the tusk of the male, can range from .
Males, at an average length of , are slightly larger than females, with an average length of .
Typical adult body weight ranges from .
Male narwhals attain sexual maturity at 11 to 13 years of age, when they are about  long.
Females become sexually mature at a younger age, between 5 to 8 years old, when they are around  long.
The pigmentation of narwhals is a mottled pattern, with blackish-brown markings over a white background.
They are darkest when born and become whiter with age; white patches develop on the navel and genital slit at sexual maturity.
Old males may be almost pure white.
Narwhals do not have a dorsal fin, possibly an evolutionary adaptation to swimming easily under ice.
Their neck vertebrae are jointed, like those of land mammals, instead of being fused together as in most whales.
Both these characteristics are shared by the beluga whale.
The tail flukes of female narwhals have front edges that are swept back, and those of males have front edges that are more concave and lack a sweep-back.
This is thought to be an adaptation for reducing drag caused by the tusk.

===Tusk===

The most conspicuous characteristic of the male narwhals are their single extremely long tusk, a canine tooth that projects from the left side of the upper jaw, through the lip and forms a left-handed helix spiral.
Their tusks grow throughout life, reaching lengths from about 1.5 to 3.1 m (4 ft 11 in to 10 ft 2 in).
It is hollow and weighs around 10 kg (22 lb).
About one in 500 males has two tusks, which occurs when the right canine, also grows out through the lip.
Females sometimes grow tusks; although only about 15 percent of females have a tusk and female tusks are smaller than those of males, with a less noticeable spiral.
Females may produce a second tusk, but there is only a single recorded case of such happening.
The tusks are surrounded posteriorly, ventrally, and laterally by several small teeth which vary in morphology and histology.
These teeth are vestigial, and can sometimes be extruded from the bone and the narwhal's mouth usually appears toothless.

Biology traditionally considers the tusk a secondary sexual characteristic, similar to the mane of a lion or the tail feathers of a peacock.
It may help determine social rank, maintain dominance hierarchies, or help young males develop skills necessary for performance in adult sexual roles.
Narwhals have rarely been observed using their tusk for fighting, other aggressive behaviors, or for breaking sea ice in their Arctic habitat.
The tusk is an innervated sensory organ with millions of patent nerve endings connecting the external ocean environment with the brain.
There is at least one recorded case of a tusk being used against another species.
A broken tusk was found embedded in the melon of a beluga, suggesting a fight.

==Distribution==

The narwhal is found predominantly in the Atlantic and Russian areas of the Arctic Ocean.
Individuals are commonly recorded in the northern part of Hudson Bay, Hudson Strait, Baffin Bay; off the east coast of Greenland; and in a strip running east from the northern end of Greenland round to eastern Russia (170° East).
Land in this strip includes Svalbard, Franz Joseph Land, and Severnaya Zemlya.
The northernmost sightings of narwhal have occurred north of Franz Joseph Land, at about 85° North latitude.
Most of the world's narwhals are concentrated in the fjords and inlets of Northern Canada and western Greenland.
They are able to survive in depths of up to  below sea level.

===Migration===
Narwhals exhibit seasonal migrations, with a high fidelity of return to preferred, ice-free summering grounds, usually in shallow waters.
In summer months, they move closer to coasts, usually in pods of 10–100.
In the winter, they move to offshore, deeper waters under thick pack ice, surfacing in narrow fissures in the sea ice, or leads.
As spring comes, these leads open up into channels and the narwhals return to the coastal bays.
Narwhals from Canada and West Greenland winter regularly in the pack ice of Davis Strait and Baffin Bay along the continental slope with less than 5% open water and high densities of Greenland halibut.
Feeding in the winter accounts for a much larger portion of narwhal energy intake than in the summer.

==Behaviour==

Narwhals normally congregate in groups of about five to ten, and sometimes up to 20 outside the summer.
Groups may be "nurseries" with only females and young, or can contain only post-dispersal juveniles or adult males ("bulls"), but mixed groups can occur at any time of year.
In the summer, several groups come together, forming larger aggregations which can contain from 500 to over 1000 individuals.
At times, bull narwhals rub their tusks together, which is known as "tusking".
This is thought to maintain social dominance hierarchies or maintenance of the tusk as a sensitive sensory organ.

===Diet===
Narwhals have a relatively restricted and specialized diet.
Their prey is predominantly composed of Greenland halibut, polar and Arctic cod, cuttlefish, shrimp and armhook squid.
Additional items found in stomachs have included wolffish, capelin, skate eggs and sometimes rocks, accidentally ingested when whales feed near the bottom.
Due to the lack of well-developed dentition in the mouth, narwhals are believed to feed by swimming towards prey until it is within close range and then sucking it with considerable force into the mouth.
It is thought that the beaked whales, which have similarly reduced dentition, also suck up their prey.

Narwhals have a very intense summer feeding society.
One study published in the Canadian Journal of Zoology tested 73 narwhals of different age and gender to see what they ate.
The individuals were from the Pond Inlet and had their stomach contents tested from June 1978 until September 1979.
The study found in 1978 that the Arctic cod (Boreogadus saida) made up about 51% of the diet of the narwhals, with the next most common animal being the Greenland halibut (Reinhardtius hippoglossoides), consisting of 37% of the weight of their diet.
A year later, the percentages of both animals in the diet of narwhals had changed.
Arctic cod represented 57%, and Greenland halibut 29% in 1979.
The deep-water fish - halibut, redfish (Sebastes marinus), and polar cod (Arctogadus glacialis) - are found in the diet of the males, which means that the narwhals can dive deeper than  below sea level.
The study found that the dietary needs of the narwhal did not differ among genders or ages.

===Diving===

When in their wintering waters, narwhals make some of the deepest dives recorded for a marine mammal, diving to at least  over 15 times per day, with many dives reaching 1,500 metres (4,900 feet).
Dives to these depths last around 25 minutes, including the time spent at the bottom and the transit down and back from the surface.

===Communication===
As with most toothed whales, narwhals use sound to navigate and hunt for food.
"Clicks", "whistles" and "knocks", may be created via air between chambers near the blow-hole, and reflected off the sloping front of the skull.
These sounds are then focused by the animal's melon, which can be controlled by musculature.
"Click trains" are produced both for echo-location of prey, and for locating obstacles at short distances.
It is possible that individual "bangs" are capable of disorienting or incapacitating prey, making them easier to hunt, but this has not been verified.
The whistles of a narwhal are rarely heard, especially compared to the beluga.
Other sounds produced by narwhals include trumpeting and squeaking door sounds.

