Blackjack, also known as twenty-one, is the most widely played casino banking game in the world.
Blackjack is a comparing card game between a player and dealer, meaning that players compete against the dealer but not against any other players.
It is played with one or more decks of 52 cards.
The object of the game is to "beat the dealer'', which can be done in a number of ways:

* Get 21 points on the player's first two cards (called a blackjack), without a dealer blackjack;
* Reach a final score higher than the dealer without exceeding 21; or
* Let the dealer draw additional cards until his or her hand exceeds 21.

The player or players are dealt an initial two-card hand and add together the value of their cards.
Face cards (kings, queens, and jacks) are counted as ten points.
A player and the dealer can count his or her own ace as 1 point or 11 points.
All other cards are counted as the numeric value shown on the card.
After receiving their initial two cards, players have the option of getting a "hit", or taking an additional card.
In a given round, the player or the dealer wins by having a score of 21 or by having the highest score that is less than 21.
Scoring higher than 21 (called "busting" or "going bust") results in a loss.
A player may win by having any final score equal to or less than 21 if the dealer busts.
If a player holds an ace valued as 11, the hand is called "soft", meaning that the player cannot go bust by taking an additional card; 11 plus the value of any other card will always be less than or equal to 21.
Otherwise, the hand is "hard".

The dealer has to take hits until his or her cards total 17 or more points.
(In some casinos, the dealer also hits on a "soft" 17—e.g., an initial ace and six.)
Players win if they do not bust and have a total that is higher than the dealer's.
The dealer loses if he or she busts or has a lesser hand than the player who has not busted.
If the player and dealer have the same point total, this is called a "push", and the player typically does not win or lose money on that hand.

Many rule variations of blackjack exist.
Since the 1960s, blackjack has been a high-profile target of advantage players, particularly card counters, who track the profile of cards that have been dealt and adapt their wagers and playing strategies accordingly.

Other casino games inspired by blackjack include Spanish 21 and pontoon.
The recreational British card game of black jack is a shedding-type game and unrelated to the subject of this article.

==History==
Blackjack's precursor was twenty-one, a game of unknown origin.
The first written reference is found in a book by the Spanish author Miguel de Cervantes, most famous for writing Don Quixote.
Cervantes was a gambler, and the main characters of his tale Rinconete y Cortadillo, from Novelas Ejemplares, are a couple of cheats working in Seville.
They are proficient at cheating at ventiuna (Spanish for twenty-one), and state that the object of the game is to reach 21 points without going over and that the ace values 1 or 11.
The game is played with the Spanish baraja deck, which lacks eights, nines and tens.
This short story was written between 1601 and 1602, implying that ventiuna was played in Castilla since the beginning of the 17th century or earlier.
Later references to this game are found in France and Spain.

When twenty-one was introduced in the United States, gambling houses offered bonus payouts to stimulate players' interest.
One such bonus was a ten-to-one payout if the player's hand consisted of the ace of spades and a black jack (either the jack of clubs or the jack of spades).
This hand was called a "blackjack" and the name stuck to the game, even though the ten-to-one bonus was soon withdrawn.
In the modern game, a blackjack refers to any hand of an ace plus a ten or face card, regardless of suits or colours.

==Rules of play at casinos==

At a casino blackjack table, the dealer faces five to seven playing positions from behind a semicircular table.
Between one and eight standard 52-card decks are shuffled together.
At the beginning of each round, up to three players place their bets in the "betting box" at each position in play.
The player whose bet is at the front of the betting box is deemed to have control over the position, and the dealer will consult the controlling player for playing decisions regarding the hand; the other players of that box are said to "play behind".
Any player is usually allowed to control or bet in as many boxes as desired at a single table, but it is prohibited for an individual to play on more than one table at a time or to place multiple bets within a single box.
In many U.S. casinos, however, players are limited to playing two or three positions at a table and often only one person is allowed to bet on each position.

The dealer deals cards from his/her left (the position on the dealer's far left is often referred to as "first base") to her far right ("third base").
Each box is dealt an initial hand of two cards visible to the people playing on it, and often to any other players.
The dealer's hand receives its first card face up, and in "hole card" games immediately receives its second card face down (the hole card), which the dealer peeks at but does not reveal unless it makes the dealer's hand a blackjack.
Hole card games are sometimes played on tables with a small mirror or electronic sensor that is used to peek securely at the hole card.
In European casinos, "no hole card" games are prevalent; the dealer's second card is neither drawn nor consulted until the players have all played their hands.

Cards are dealt either from one or two handheld decks, from a dealer's shoe, or from a shuffling machine.
Single cards are dealt to each wagered-on position clockwise from the dealer's left, followed by a single card to the dealer, followed by an additional card to each of the positions in play.
The players' initial cards may be dealt face up or face down (more common in single-deck games).

The players' object is to win money by creating card totals that turn out to be higher than the dealer's hand but do not exceed 21 ("busting"/"breaking"), or alternatively by allowing the dealer to take additional cards until he/she busts.
On their turn, players must choose whether to "hit" (take a card), "stand" (end their turn), "double" (double wager, take a single card and finish), "split" (if the two cards have the same value, separate them to make two hands) or "surrender" (give up a half-bet and retire from the game).
Number cards count as their natural value; the jack, queen, and king (also known as "face cards" or "pictures") count as 10; aces are valued as either 1 or 11 according to the player's choice.
If the hand value exceeds 21 points, it busts, and all bets on it are immediately forfeit.
After all boxes have finished playing, the dealer's hand is resolved by drawing cards until the hand busts or achieves a value of 17 or higher (a dealer total of 17 including an ace, or "soft 17", must be drawn to in some games and must stand in others).
The dealer never doubles, splits, or surrenders.
If the dealer busts, all remaining player hands win.
If the dealer does not bust, each remaining bet wins if its hand is higher than the dealer's, and loses if it is lower.
In the case of a tied score, known as "push" or "standoff",  bets are normally returned without adjustment; however, a blackjack beats any hand that is not a blackjack, even one with a value of 21.
An outcome of blackjack vs. blackjack results in a push.
Wins are paid out at 1:1, or equal to the wager, except for winning blackjacks, which are traditionally paid at 3:2 (meaning the player receives three dollars for every two bet), or one-and-a-half times the wager.
Many casinos today pay blackjacks at less than 3:2 at some tables.

Blackjack games almost always provide a side bet called insurance, which may be played when dealer's upcard is an ace.
Additional side bets, such as "Dealer Match" which pays when the player's cards match the dealer's up card, are sometimes available.

===Player decisions===
After receiving an initial two cards, the player has up to four standard options: "hit", "stand", "double down", or "split".
Each option has a corresponding hand signal.
Some games give the player a fifth option, "surrender".
* Hit: Take another card from the dealer.
: Signal: Scrape cards against table (in handheld games); tap the table with finger or wave hand toward body (in games dealt face up).
* Stand: Take no more cards, also known as "stand pat", "stick", or "stay".
: Signal: Slide cards under chips (in handheld games); wave hand horizontally (in games dealt face up).
* Double down: The player is allowed to increase the initial bet by up to 100% in exchange for committing to stand after receiving exactly one more card.
The additional bet is placed in the betting box next to the original bet.
Some games do not permit the player to increase the bet by amounts other than 100%.
Non-controlling players may double their wager or decline to do so, but they are bound by the controlling player's decision to take only one card.
: Signal: Place additional chips beside the original bet outside the betting box, and point with one finger.
* Split (only available as the first decision of a hand): If the first two cards have the same value, the player can split them into two hands, by moving a second bet equal to the first into an area outside the betting box.
The dealer separates the two cards and draws an additional card on each, placing one bet with each hand.
The player then plays out the two separate hands in turn, with some restrictions.
Occasionally, in the case of ten-valued cards, some casinos allow splitting only when the cards have the identical ranks; for instance, a hand of 10-10 may be split, but not one of 10-king.
However, usually all 10-value cards are treated the same.
Doubling and further splitting of post-split hands may be restricted, and blackjacks after a split are counted as non-blackjack 21 when comparing against the dealer's hand.
Hitting split aces is usually not allowed.
Non-controlling players may follow the controlling player by putting down an additional bet or decline to do so, instead associating their existing wager with one of the two post-split hands.
In that case they must choose which hand to play behind before the second cards are drawn.
Some casinos do not give non-controlling players this option, and require that the wager of a player not electing to split remains with the first of the two post-split hands.
: Signal: Place additional chips next to the original bet outside the betting box; point with two fingers spread into a V formation.
* Surrender (only available as first decision of a hand): Some games offer the option to "surrender", usually in hole-card games and directly after the dealer has checked for blackjack (but see below for variations).
When the player surrenders, the house takes half the player's bet and returns the other half to the player; this terminates the player's interest in the hand.
The request to surrender is made verbally, there being no standard hand signal.

Hand signals are used to assist the "eye in the sky", a person or video camera located above the table and sometimes concealed behind one-way glass.
The eye in the sky usually makes a video recording of the table, which helps in resolving disputes and identifying dealer mistakes, and is also used to protect the casino against dealers who steal chips or players who cheat.
The recording can further be used to identify advantage players whose activities, while legal, make them undesirable customers.
In the event of a disagreement between a player's hand signals and their words, the hand signal takes precedence.

Each hand may normally "hit" as many times as desired so long as the total is not above hard 20.
On reaching 21 (including soft 21), the hand is normally required to stand; busting is an irrevocable loss and the players' wagers are immediately forfeited to the house.
After a bust or a stand, play proceeds to the next hand clockwise around the table.
When the last hand has finished being played, the dealer reveals the hole card, and stands or draws further cards according to the rules of the game for dealer drawing.
When the outcome of the dealer's hand is established, any hands with bets remaining on the table are resolved (usually in counterclockwise order): bets on losing hands are forfeited, the bet on a push is left on the table, and winners are paid out.

===Insurance===
If the dealer's upcard is an ace, the player is offered the option of taking "insurance" before the dealer checks the hole card.

