Human rights are moral principles that set out certain standards of human behaviour, and are regularly protected as legal rights in national and international law.
They are "commonly understood as inalienable fundamental rights to which a person is inherently entitled simply because she or he is a human being."
Human rights are thus conceived as universal (applicable everywhere) and egalitarian (the same for everyone).
The doctrine of human rights has been highly influential within international law, global and regional institutions.
Policies of states and in the activities of non-governmental organizations and have become a cornerstone of public policy around the world.
The idea of human rights suggests, "if the public discourse of peacetime global society can be said to have a common moral language, it is that of human rights."
The strong claims made by the doctrine of human rights continue to provoke considerable skepticism and debates about the content, nature and justifications of human rights to this day.
Indeed, the question of what is meant by a "right" is itself controversial and the subject of continued philosophical debate.

Many of the basic ideas that animated the human rights movement developed in the aftermath of the Second World War and the atrocities of The Holocaust, culminating in the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Paris by the United Nations General Assembly in 1948.
The ancient world did not possess the concept of universal human rights.
The true forerunner of human rights discourse was the concept of natural rights which appeared as part of the medieval Natural law tradition that became prominent during the Enlightenment with such philosophers as John Locke, Francis Hutcheson, and Jean-Jacques Burlamaqui, and featured prominently in the English Bill of Rights and the political discourse of the American Revolution and the French Revolution.

From this foundation, the modern human rights arguments emerged over the latter half of the twentieth century.

==History of concept==

Although ideas of rights and liberty have existed in some form for much of human history, they do not resemble the modern conception of human rights.
According to Jack Donnelly, in the ancient world, "traditional societies typically have had elaborate systems of duties... conceptions of justice, political legitimacy, and human flourishing that sought to realize human dignity, flourishing, or well-being entirely independent of human rights.
These institutions and practices are alternative to, rather than different formulations of, human rights".
The modern sense of human rights can be traced to Renaissance Europe and the Protestant Reformation, alongside the disappearance of the feudal authoritarianism and religious conservativism that dominated the Middle Ages.
One theory is that human rights were developed during the early Modern period, alongside the European secularization of Judeo-Christian ethics.
The most commonly held view is that concept of human rights evolved in the West, and that while earlier cultures had important ethical concepts, they generally lacked a concept of human rights.
For example, McIntyre argues there is no word for "right" in any language before 1400.
Medieval charters of liberty such as the English Magna Carta were not charters of human rights, rather they were the foundation  and constituted a form of limited political and legal agreement to address specific political circumstances, in the case of Magna Carta later being recognised in the course of early modern debates about rights.
One of the oldest records of human rights is the statute of Kalisz (1264), giving privileges to the Jewish minority in the Kingdom of Poland such as protection from discrimination and hate speech.

=== 16th–18th century ===

The earliest conceptualization of human rights is credited to ideas about natural rights emanating from natural law.
In particular, the issue of universal rights was introduced by the examination of extending rights to indigenous peoples by Spanish clerics, such as Francisco de Vitoria and  Bartolomé de Las Casas.
In the Valladolid debate, Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda, who maintained an Aristotelian view of humanity as divided into classes of different worth, argued with Las Casas, who argued in favor of equal rights to freedom of slavery for all humans regardless of race or religion.

17th-century English philosopher John Locke discussed natural rights in his work, identifying them as being "life, liberty, and estate (property)", and argued that such fundamental rights could not be surrendered in the social contract.
In Britain in 1689, the English Bill of Rights and the Scottish Claim of Right each made illegal a range of oppressive governmental actions.
Two major revolutions occurred during the 18th century, in the United States (1776) and in France (1789), leading to the adoption of the United States Declaration of Independence and the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen respectively, both of which established certain legal rights.
Additionally, the Virginia Declaration of Rights of 1776 encoded into law a number of fundamental civil rights and civil freedoms.

These were followed by developments in philosophy of human rights by philosophers such as Thomas Paine, John Stuart Mill and G.W.F. Hegel during the 18th and 19th centuries.
The term human rights probably came into use some time between Paine's The Rights of Man and William Lloyd Garrison's 1831 writings in The Liberator, in which he stated that he was trying to enlist his readers in "the great cause of human rights".
Although the term had been used by at least one author as early as 1742.

=== 19th century ===

In the 19th century, human rights became a central concern over the issue of slavery.
A number of reformers, notably William Wilberforce in Britain, worked towards the abolition of slavery.
This was achieved in the British Empire by the Slave Trade Act 1807 and the Slavery Abolition Act 1833.
In the United States, all the northern states had abolished the institution of slavery between 1777 and 1804, although southern states clung tightly to the "peculiar institution".
Conflict and debates over the expansion of slavery to new territories constituted one of the reasons for the southern states' secession and the American Civil War.
During the reconstruction period immediately following the war, several amendments to the United States Constitution were made.
These included the 13th amendment, banning slavery, the 14th amendment, assuring full citizenship and civil rights to all people born in the United States, and the 15th amendment, guaranteeing African Americans the right to vote.

Many groups and movements have achieved profound social changes over the course of the 20th century in the name of human rights.
In Europe and North America, labour unions brought about laws granting workers the right to strike, establishing minimum work conditions and forbidding or regulating child labor.
The women's rights movement succeeded in gaining for many women the right to vote.
National liberation movements in many countries succeeded in driving out colonial powers.
One of the most influential was Mahatma Gandhi's movement to free his native India from British rule.
Movements by long-oppressed racial and religious minorities succeeded in many parts of the world, among them the African American Civil Rights Movement, and more recent diverse identity politics movements, on behalf of women and minorities in the United States.

The establishment of the International Committee of the Red Cross, the 1864 Lieber Code and the first of the Geneva Conventions in 1864 laid the foundations of International humanitarian law, to be further developed following the two World Wars.

=== 20th century ===

The World Wars, and the huge losses of life and gross abuses of human rights that took place during them, were a driving force behind the development of modern human rights instruments.
The League of Nations was established in 1919 at the negotiations over the Treaty of Versailles following the end of World War I. The League's goals included disarmament, preventing war through collective security, settling disputes between countries through negotiation and diplomacy, and improving global welfare.
Enshrined in its charter was a mandate to promote many of the rights later included in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

At the 1945 Yalta Conference, the Allied Powers agreed to create a new body to supplant the League's role; this was to be the United Nations.
The United Nations has played an important role in international human-rights law since its creation.
Following the World Wars, the United Nations and its members developed much of the discourse and the bodies of law that now make up international humanitarian law and international human rights law.

==Philosophy==

The philosophy of human rights attempts to examine the underlying basis of the concept of human rights and critically looks at its content and justification.
Several theoretical approaches have been advanced to explain how and why human rights have become a part of social expectations.

One of the oldest Western philosophies of human rights is that they are a product of a natural law, stemming from different philosophical or religious grounds.
Other theories hold that human rights codify moral behavior which is a human social product developed by a process of biological and social evolution (associated with Hume).
Human rights are also described as a sociological pattern of rule setting (as in the sociological theory of law and the work of Weber).
These approaches include the notion that individuals in a society accept rules from legitimate authority in exchange for security and economic advantage (as in Rawls) – a social contract.
The two theories that dominate contemporary human rights discussion are the interest theory and the will theory.
Interest theory argues that the principal function of human rights is to protect and promote certain essential human interests, while will theory attempts to establish the validity of human rights based on the unique human capacity for freedom.

=== Criticism ===
The claims made by human rights to universality have led to criticism.
Philosophers who have criticized the concept of human rights include Jeremy Bentham, Edmund Burke, Friedrich Nietzsche and Karl Marx.
Political philosophy professor Charles Blattberg argues that discussion of human rights, being abstract, demotivates people from upholding the values that rights are meant to affirm.
The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy gives particular attention to two types of criticisms: the one questioning universality of human rights and the one denying them objective ground.
Alain Pellet, an international law scholar, criticizes "human rightism" approach as denying the principle of sovereignty and claiming a special place for human rights among the branches of international law; Alain de Benoist questions human rights premises of human equality.
David Kennedy had listed pragmatic worries and polemical charges concerning human rights in 2002 in Harvard Human Rights Journal.

==Classification==
Human rights can be classified and organized in a number of different ways.
At an international level the most common categorisation of human rights has been to split them into civil and political rights, and economic, social and cultural rights.

Civil and political rights are enshrined in articles 3 to 21 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR).
Economic, social and cultural rights are enshrined in articles 22 to 28 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR).

===Indivisibility===
The UDHR included both economic, social and cultural rights and civil and political rights because it was based on the principle that the different rights could only successfully exist in combination:

This is held to be true because without civil and political rights the public cannot assert their economic, social and cultural rights.
Similarly, without livelihoods and a working society, the public cannot assert or make use of civil or political rights (known as the full belly thesis).

The indivisibility and interdependence of all human rights has been confirmed by the 1993 Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action:

This statement was again endorsed at the 2005 World Summit in New York (paragraph 121).

Although accepted by the signatories to the UDHR, most do not in practice give equal weight to the different types of rights.
Some Western cultures have often given priority to civil and political rights, sometimes at the expense of economic and social rights such as the right to work, to education, health and housing.
Similarly the ex Soviet bloc countries and Asian countries have tended to give priority to economic, social and cultural rights, but have often failed to provide civil and political rights.

===Categorization===
Opponents of the indivisibility of human rights argue that economic, social and cultural rights are fundamentally different from civil and political rights and require completely different approaches.
Economic, social and cultural rights are argued to be:
* aspirations or goals, as opposed to real 'legal' rights
* ideologically divisive/political, meaning that there is no consensus on what should and shouldn't be provided as a right
* non-justiciable, meaning that their provision, or the breach of them, cannot be judged in a court of law
* positive, meaning that they require active provision of entitlements by the state (as opposed to the state being required only to prevent the breach of rights)
* progressive, meaning that they will take significant time to implement
* resource-intensive, meaning that they are expensive and difficult to provide
* socialist, as opposed to capitalist
* vague, meaning they cannot be quantitatively measured, and whether they are adequately provided or not is difficult to judge

Similarly civil and political rights are categorized as:
* capitalist
* cost-free
* immediate, meaning they can be immediately provided if the state decides to
* justiciable
* negative, meaning the state can protect them simply by taking no action
* non-ideological/non-political
* precise, meaning their provision is easy to judge and measure
* real 'legal' rights

Olivia Ball and Paul Gready argue that for both civil and political rights and economic, social and cultural rights, it is easy to find examples which do not fit into the above categorisation.
Among several others, they highlight the fact that maintaining a judicial system, a fundamental requirement of the civil right to due process before the law and other rights relating to judicial process, is positive, resource-intensive, progressive and vague, while the social right to housing is precise, justiciable and can be a real 'legal' right.

===Three generations===
Another categorization, offered by Karel Vasak, is that there are three generations of human rights: first-generation civil and political rights (right to life and political participation), second-generation economic, social and cultural rights (right to subsistence) and third-generation solidarity rights (right to peace, right to clean environment).
Out of these generations, the third generation is the most debated and lacks both legal and political recognition.
This categorisation is at odds with the indivisibility of rights, as it implicitly states that some rights can exist without others.
Prioritisation of rights for pragmatic reasons is however a widely accepted necessity.
Human rights expert Philip Alston argues:

He, and others, urge caution with prioritisation of rights:

Some human rights are said to be "inalienable rights".
The term inalienable rights (or unalienable rights) refers to "a set of human rights that are fundamental, are not awarded by human power, and cannot be surrendered."

==International protection==

In the aftermath of the atrocities of World War II, there was increased concern for the social and legal protection of human rights as fundamental freedoms.
The foundation of the United Nations and the provisions of the United Nations Charter provided a basis for a comprehensive system of international law and practise for the protection of human rights.
Since then, international human rights law has been characterized by a linked system of conventions, treaties, organisations, and political bodies, rather than any single entity or set of laws.

===United Nations Charter===

