A cajón (kaˈxon (Ka-hon), "box", "crate" or "drawer") is nominally a six sided, box-shaped percussion instrument originally from Peru, played by slapping the front or rear faces (generally thin plywood) with the hands, fingers, or sometimes various implements such as brushes, mallets, or sticks.

== Description ==

Sheets of  thick wood are generally used for five sides of the box. A thinner sheet of plywood is nailed on as the sixth side, and acts as the striking surface or head. A sound hole is cut on the back side. The top edges are often left unattached and can be slapped against the box.

The modern cajón may have rubber feet, and has several screws at the top for adjusting percussive timbre. Originally they would be only wooden boxes but now some versions may also have several stretched cords pressed against the top for a buzz-like effect or tone. Guitar strings, rattles or drum snares may serve this purpose. They may also have bells on the inside near the cords.

The player sits astride the box, tilting it at an angle while striking the head between his knees. The percussionist can play the sides with the top of his palms and fingers for additional sounds.

== Origins and evolution ==

The cajón is the most widely used Afro-Peruvian musical instrument since the late 18th century. Slaves of west and central African origin in the Americas, specifically Perú, are considered to be the source of the cajón drum. Currently, the instrument is common in musical performance throughout some of the Americas and Spain.

The cajón was developed during the periods of slavery in coastal Perú, where it is associated with several Afro-Peruvian genres. The instrument reached a peak in popularity by 1850, and by the end of the 19th century cajón players were experimenting with the design of the instrument by bending some of the planks in the cajón's body to alter the instrument's patterns of sound vibration. After slavery the cajón was spread to a much larger audience including Criollos.

Given that the cajón comes from slave musicians in the Spanish colonial Americas, there are two complementary origin theories for the instrument. It is possible that the drum is a direct descendant of a number of boxlike musical instruments from west and central Africa, especially Angola, and the Antilles. These instruments were adapted by Peruvian slaves from the Spanish shipping crates at their disposal. In port cities like Matanzas, Cuba codfish shipping crates and small dresser drawers became similar instruments.

Another theory states that slaves simply used boxes as musical instruments to subvert Spanish colonial bans on music in predominantly African areas; In this way, cajones could easily be disguised as seats or stools, thus avoiding identification as musical instruments. In all likelihood it is a combination of these factors - African origins and Spanish suppression of slave music - that led to the cajón's creation.

Spanish flamenco guitar player Paco de Lucía brought to Spain a cajón formerly owned by Peruvian percussionist Caitro Soto in 1977 with the purpose of using it as a more reliable rhythmic base in Flamenco.

In 2001 the cajón was declared National Heritage by the Peruvian National Institute of Culture. In 2014 the Organization of American States declared the cajón an "Instrument of Peru for the Americas"

== Contemporary music ==
Today, the cajón is heard extensively in Coastal Peruvian musical styles  such as Tondero, Zamacueca and Peruvian Waltz, modern Flamenco and certain styles of modern Rumba.

The modern cajón is often used to accompany the acoustic guitar. The cajón is becoming rapidly popular in blues, pop, rock, funk, world music, jazz, etc.

The cajón has become a popular instrument in the folk music of Ireland and is often played alongside the bodhrán.

== Cajón playing styles ==

The instrument has been played not only with hands, but also with plastic and metal brushes, as normally used for drums. Another way of playing the cajón is to use an ordinary bass drum pedal, thus turning the cajón into an indirect percussion instrument. This enables the player to beat it just like a pedal-bass-drum, but it also restricts the player's standard position.

== Gallery ==

== See also ==
* Afro-Peruvian music
* Jawbone (instrument)
* Festejo
* Flamenco
* Cajón de rumba - Cuba
* Cajón de tapeo - México

==References==

==External links==

*How to Build a Cajón
*DavisDrum Curved sides cajons BeatBox Davis.
* Cajon info site.
