Hong Kong and Its People 

Exciting, mysterious, glamorous — these words have described Hong Kong for at least a century. With its vibrant atmosphere and night-and-day activity it is an intoxicating place. Hong Kong is crowded — it has one of the world’s greatest population densities. But it is also efficient, with one of the best transportation systems anywhere, and for such a crowded place, quiet — you don’t hear voices raised in anger, motorists sitting on their horns, or loud boomboxes. Shopping never ends — there’s always another inviting spot just down the street. You’ll find Hong Kong easy to get around, the people helpful, English spoken everywhere, and food that lives up to its reputation. On 1 July, 1997 the British Crown Colony of Hong Kong reverted to Chinese sovereignty as a Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China. Today Hong Kong remains a capitalist enclave with its laws and rights intact, and China has promised that Hong Kong will continue in this fashion for at least 50 years. Beijing’s announced policy of maintaining Hong Kong’s prosperity and stability makes sense. Hong Kong has long been China’s handiest window on the West, and the city is unrivaled in its commercial know-how and managerial expertise. Around the time of the transition there was much speculation about how things would change. But in fact, once news of the handover vanished from the front pages, the people of Hong Kong returned to their usual topics of conversation: the economy and the price of housing. The impression of the visitor today will be that very little has changed. Establishments are no longer called “Royal,” Queen Elizabeth has vanished from the coinage, and the Union Jack has been replaced by the flag of China and the new Hong Kong flag with its bauhinia flower. But in fact, there have been changes, many of them due to economic progress, new construction, and other factors that influence cities all over the world. Others are more subtle. British social customs are still evident in the kind of polite service you get in hotels and in the long lines of people waiting for buses at rush hour. The British population has decreased; today there are as many American and Australian ex-pats as there are British. With a population of nearly eight million and a total area of just over 1,095 square km (423 square miles), housing is one of Hong Kong’s perennial nightmares. To alleviate the problem, the government has become the city’s major landlord with the construction of massive apartment blocks that, though they have every modern facility, average only 9 square m (100 square ft) in size. Whole cities have been created in the New Territories, although the unimaginative architecture of these towns has been criticized. Of Hong Kong’s population, 98 percent are Chinese. The majority are Cantonese, born in Hong Kong, or from South China, but there are immigrants from all over China.

This text is from MASC.